Kerberos Authentication
The Kerberos authentication
protocol has been used as
Microsoft’s primary authentication
mechanism since Windows Server 2003.
While NTLM authentication works through a
principle of challenge and response,
Windows-based Kerberos authentication
uses a ticket system.
At a high level, Kerberos client
authentication to a service
in Active Directory involves the
use of a domain controller
in the role of a key distribution
center, or KDC.
Let’s review this process in detail
in order to lay a foundation
for further discussion.
When a user logs in to their workstation,
a request is sent to the domain controller
which has the role of KDC
and also maintains the
Authentication Server service.
This Authentication Server Request
contains a time stamp that is encrypted
using a hash derived from the
password of the user and the username.
When the domain controller receives the
request, it looks up the password hash
associated with the specific user and
attempts to decrypt the time stamp.
If the decryption process is successful
and the time stamp is not a duplicate,
the authentication is
considered successful.
The domain controller replies to
the client with an Authentication
Server Reply which contains
a session key,
since Kerberos is stateless, and
a Ticket Granting Ticket, or TGT.
The session key is encrypted
using the user’s password hash,
and may be decrypted by
the client and reused.
The Ticket Granting Ticket contains
information regarding the user,
including group memberships,
the domain, a time stamp,
the IP address of the client
and the session key.
In order to avoid tampering, the TGT
is encrypted by a secret key
known only to the KDC and can
not be decrypted by the client.
Once the client has received the session
key and the Ticket Granting Ticket,
the KDC considers the client
authentication complete.
When the user wishes to access resources
of the domain, such as a network share,
an Exchange mailbox, or
some other application with a
registered service principal name, it
must again contact the KDC.
This time, the client constructs a
Ticket Granting Service Request packet
that consists of the current
user and a timestamp
(encrypted using the session key),
the SPN of that resource,
and the encrypted Ticket Granting Ticket.
Next, the ticket granting service on
the KDC receives the Ticket Granting
Service Request, and if the SPN exists in
the domain, the TGT is decrypted
using the secret key known
only to the KDC.
The session key is then extracted
from the Ticket Granting Ticket
and used to decrypt the username
and timestamp of the request.
At this point the KDC performs
several checks and if this verification
process succeeds, the ticket granting
service responds to the client
with a Ticket Granting Server Reply.
This packet contains three parts: the SPN,
a session key, and a service ticket
containing the username
and group memberships
along with the newly-created
session key.
The first two parts, SPN and session key
are encrypted using the session key
associated with the creation of the Ticket
Granting Ticket and the service ticket
is encrypted using the password
hash of the service account
registered with the
SPN in question.
Once the authentication process
by the KDC is complete
and the client has both a
session key and a service ticket,
the service authentication begins.
First, the client sends an application
request to the application server,
which includes the username and a time
stamp encrypted with the session key
associated with the service ticket
along with the service ticket itself.
The application server decrypts
the service ticket
using the service account
password hash
and extracts the username
and the session key.
It then uses the session key to decrypt
the username from the application request.
If the application request username
matches the one decrypted
from the service ticket,
the request is accepted.
Before access is granted, the service
inspects the supplied group
memberships in the service ticket
and assigns appropriate permissions
to the user, after which the user
may access the requested service.
This protocol may seem complicated
and perhaps even convoluted,
but it was designed to mitigate
various network attacks
and prevent the use
of fake credentials.
Now that we have explored the foundations
of both NTLM and Kerberos authentication,
let’s explore various cached credential
storage and service account attacks.